^1 すべての法則について言えることですが、一つの例外を挙げることが法則の存在の証明になります。
^1 As with all rules, there is always one exception to prove it! 

その例外についてはすぐ後ほど触れますが、ここではそれが私達がイメージする現代の社会のあり方からは余りにもかけ離れているので、実際上は除外してしまって構わないものであるとだけ理解していただければ十分です。
We will address that exception shortly but suffice it to say that the exception is sufficiently aberrant relative to our modern conception of society as to be effectively excluded.



^2 連邦議会議員のCharles Binderup氏が、これをFord氏による言葉の引用だとしました。
^2 The quote was attributed to Mr. Ford by the late Congressman Charles Binderup.



^3 これらは通貨です。この用語については後ほど正式に定義し議論します。
^3 These things are currencies which is a term we will formally define and address.



^4 厳密に言うと、ここで例題としている家族のケースにおいてさえ、前提を少しだけ変えれば、実は取引が（わずかですが）起こり得るということが分かります。
^4 Technically, if we switch things up just a little bit, we see that trade actually can happen (albeit subtly) even in our family example. 

例えば、十代の息子は夕食の席では多めの分量を与えられるが、牧場では彼の体の大きさと強さを活かして、きつい肉体労働を姉や妹よりも多くこなすことが求められる、ということがあるかも知れません。
For instance, maybe the teenage son is given a bigger portion of food at supper but he’s also expected to use his physical size and strength to perform more of the hard manual labor on the farm than his sisters. 

ただここでは私達はロマンチストになることにして、この例題の家族においては、「もっと多く」という要望は、単に無償の愛によって求められるがままに与えられるものと仮定しましょう。
Let’s be romantics though and assume that in this particular family, ‘more’ is given when asked simply out of unconditional love. 

別の言い方をすると、私達は「取引」というものを、単に家族・個体集団の単位で交わされるやり取りであると定義でき、その集団内におけるやり取りはカウントしないということです。
Alternatively, we can simply define ‘trade’ as happening between family/living units, and not within them.



^5 Interestingly, there are many instances where the physical item itself may have value away from its symbolic representation of money. If the date on any of your dimes (American 10 cent pieces) is 1952, then odds are good that that dime is minted out of 90% actual silver (as opposed to cheaper metals). With the current value for pure silver being around $16 an ounce, its pure silver value would be worth about $1.25. You could also deposit it in your bank for 10 cents - but why would you?
 
^6 Some people (known as ‘gold bugs’) assert that ‘gold is money’. I don’t disagree, and we’ll in fact explore gold in more depth shortly. But money isn’t exclusively gold. There are other types of money – some better (and worse) than others. As such, I would rephrase the statement of ‘gold is money’ to ‘gold is a high-quality form of money.’

^7 New supplies of ‘money’ can at times be introduced to systems without causing imbalance. If allowed to persist though, they all ultimately result in the same place – catastrophe.

^8 This relates to the characteristic of medium of exchange, and is temporary with continued adoption.

^9 The one that throughout the ages has done the best job (and which we discuss at more length shortly) is gold.

^10 As we will see though, although immediate hyperinflation is no longer a high risk, long-term inflation and its consequences remains not only a risk, but a certainty.

^11 I know that I am repeating the quote. Please allow me some leeway for introducing what I see as appropriate dramatic effect.

^12 And his song ‘The 10 Crack Commandments’.

^13 This is precisely what has happened in countries such as Zimbabwe and Venezuela where the 2nd MoM Commandment has been violated.

^14 My last repetitive quote in this treatise.

^15 There is quite literally, something otherworldly about this stuff that is born out of astronomical collisions and explosions. Modern science isn’t exactly sure how gold molecules are formed, but current consensus is that they’re created in either supernovas or neutron star collisions.
^16 A topic we leave alone here, as it doesn’t materially add to this exposition.

^17 There are other features silver has which gold does not – for instance its use in many industrial processes. We acknowledge this as a fact, but pursue it no further as it doesn’t materially add to this exposition.





^18 Actually, it is currency they will be printing, not money. I apologize now and in advance for what I expect will be a continued ‘mixing up’ of terminology. I do this for the sake of ‘flow’ and humbly ask understanding that sometimes, in order to clearly communicate complex topics, some liberties must be taken in relying upon useful but technically incorrect terminology. I hope that by the time the reader understands the core issues, he or she will be able to re-read the document and point to the instances where this occurs without malice.



^19 It is a curious fact that many religious scriptures have stern warnings and prohibitions surrounding the act of borrowing/lending money, often even discussing remedies for the imbalances that inexorably arise (e.g., debt jubilees). Perhaps this is because the very nature of entering into a loan introduces seeds of enslavement, even if only in the seemingly mild and innocuous mindset that one party (the borrower) is now beneath another (the lender). This dynamic hides in plain sight in our language anytime we refer to someone as being indebted to another.




^20 Communism, capitalism, socialism, idealism, and in this case, monetarism.




^21 As human beings, we all have both higher and lower aspects to our nature. It’s vitally important that we provide ourselves with systems and structures that are conducive to the expression of our more noble aspirations, or at the very least, don’t provide a breeding ground for our baser impulses. It’s nothing short of extraordinary what can be accomplished in systems when the interests of all participants are aligned. Conversely, when interests are not aligned, it is generally only a matter of time before the system starts to express imbalance – whether that be an initial wobble or a full-on collapse.




^22 It’s worth noting that in recent years, many international governments have requested a return of their gold being held in other countries – with varying degree of compliance from the custodians.




^23 What typically happens is that these banks are ‘bailed out by the government’, aka, the public taxpayer. Although it may feel like this is a victory, all that has happened is that the public (like depositors of times past) has shouldered the losses, while those who enriched themselves throughout the process keep their gains.




^24 In the 21st century, there are strikingly few countries where bankers have been held accountable for criminal behavior. Unfortunately, this system where bankers often feel they have blanket immunity to criminal prosecution has tended to breed more illicit behavior.




^25 We haven’t specifically addressed this, but it has been the ongoing assumption for our examples.




^26 More Saul Goodman than Jimmy McGill.




^27 It is worthwhile noting that while the Federal Reserve is a private (not government owned) institution that wields enormous power over the entire world – the public does not know who all the owners are. Furthermore, even while there are areas of activity within it that are causes for concern, an audit has never been done. If you’ve wondered up until now what people who call to ‘Audit the Fed’ are referencing, this is it.



^28 If you haven’t read George Orwell’s novel 1984 please do so. Orwell coined the term Newspeak in the novel.



^29 Appealing to human being’s innate xenophobia is a terrific bet. If these bogeymen are represented as sufficiently culturally different, it also enables the public to de-humanize them and their cohorts.



^30 If you question whether there is indeed endemic graft and misappropriation of funding in the US Defense industry, you need only compare the US military budget to, for instance Russia. You may note that despite its egregiously larger spend, there are many who convincingly argue that the U.S. does not maintain a significant advantage (if one at all). Similar demonstrations can sadly be made (though not necessarily in comparison to Russia specifically) in the US Healthcare and Education industries (among others).




^31 For those interested, I highly recommend Howard Zinn’s People’s History of the U.S. Last I checked, it was free to read at the website ‘historyisaweapon.com’.



^32 Understanding of these issues goes much further back, but I think beginning here with the time of Jefferson suffices.



^33 If you are looking for modern day analogues, consider (sub-prime) mortgages, student-loans, auto-backed loans, and now the plethora of ‘personal loans’ advertised seemingly everywhere.




^34 If you are wondering what sort of numbers we are talking about with regard to the current ‘reckoning’ that is imbedded in our current system – consider this: U.S. Federal debt is over $20 trillion (about half of that creates in the last 10 years). When you add Social Security and Medicare obligations to that number, it quickly reaches well in excess of $60 trillion (arguably substantially higher). Assuming U.S. population of 350 million, that’s $175,000 of debt which the average (unwitting) member of the public (man, woman, child) will need to account for – and the number is rising each year. Did you know that you were signed up for this?




^35 This is admittedly an oversimplification. There is demand for reserve currency not just for store of value, but other moneyness aspects. Furthermore, it may be spent in foreign countries, which can lead to a concept called ‘exporting inflation’. We note these complications, but spend no more time on them here as the net effect in the country of the Reserve currency’s sponsor is the same – a greater ability to grow the money supply without generating local inflation.




^36 Never mind that oil does a poor job of satisfying ‘moneyness’ criteria.




^37 There was also an element to the agreement whereby the Saudi’s would invest their dollars in U.S. government debt, but we gloss over this here as it isn’t critical to this aspect of the narrative.



^38 It also becomes increasingly important to keep the public distracted with issues that (while often have merit in their own right) often pale in comparison to the big issue of monetary structure.




^39 Yes, there is the possibility of future quantum computing advances breaking the encryption. There are however already technologies that may be implemented via a future fork of the chain to offset this risk.




^40 Another version of the saying is ‘putting your money where your mouth is.’




^41 Relatively few people own their own businesses and so have the discretion to make this decision directly. Most people though are employed by others and certainly have it within their power to raise the topic with employers, as well as increase patronage to businesses that adopt this mechanism.



^42 For those who have an appreciation for different religious traditions, 10% is traditionally the amount used for ‘tithing’. Whether you believe in religious tradition or not, it is to me intuitively appealing that a small ‘sacrifice’ (the 10%) is made – almost as an ‘offering’ to the advancement of the greater good. The fact that If it works as I envision, it would ultimately enrich everyone involved is icing on the cake.




^43 Attempts to convince people that ‘they have a say’ in government will be made with issues of strong emotional appeal but limited practical significance. This is already happening.



^44 If you’ve just skipped to this section without reading any of the previous ones, Hello! It is my belief that the sum total of this report before this section confers significant strength to the valuation assessment I will propose here. As such, I highly encourage you to review earlier chapters as they may not only impart deeper conviction in terms of the value and utility of Bitcoin, but the moral consequences of adopting (or not adopting) it.



^45 While there are many important nuances and details to consider I will reserve addressing those for another time and/or venue. My main focus here is to offer frameworks rather than detailed exposition.



^46 This number currently stands at approximately $15 trillion of our $80 trillion total – just under 20%.




^47 For the purposes of this example, we can assume that all upside is capped at our definition of success, and any shortcoming results in a 100% loss of investment.



^48 Although it may not sound like it, Expected Value is actually a formal statistical and financial term. It’s achieved by simply multiplying each possible outcome by the likelihood of each outcome. In our instance, we are ascribing a 2% likelihood to a value of $1.5 million, and a 98% likelihood to a value of zero.



^49 Risk-free-rate. This is, of course a misnomer, and I find it almost ridiculously so – but in the interests of ‘speaking the language of finance’ I am treating it as valid.



^50 In case you were wondering, a current price of $4,000 – while still adhering to our example’s rules dictates that the implied probability of success is 0.341%.




^51 If we assume that just 5% of those controlling the approximately US$40 trillion in investable wealth controlled by High-Net-Worth individuals acts this way, this alone would represent incremental demand for Bitcoin in the amount of nearly $7 billion, or about 11% of its total market-cap – not an insignificant upward pressure, even before considering the substantial implications of feedback loops and iteration.



^52 You have of course booked an unrealized gain already, so you are not unhappy – but there is now ‘less upside’ left.




^53 Theoretically, rising prices of a stock may help fundamentals insomuch as the Company may use their now- more-valuable stock as currency to pay for prospectively value enhancing projects. This is hardly a given though and may be thought of as (once again) an ‘exception’ that proves the rule.



^54Unlike when someone sees a stock or bond rise in value. When that happens, they don’t think that the underlying currency it is priced in has depreciated!



^55 Particularly as a medium-of-exchange. Furthermore, although price-stability was excluded from our ‘moneyness’ definitions, we would see this express itself as more goods are priced in Bitcoin, causing Fiat to finally bear the burden of its own volatility.



^56 Which I hope is a camp of which readers of this treatise will consider themselves a member.




^57 Calling the systemic problems ‘cracks showing’ is truly making a molehill out of a mountain.




^58 "The Monkey's Paw", by W.W. Jacobs is a short story I highly recommend. I seem to recall a Halloween episode of ‘The Simpsons’ doing a parody of it.




^59 There is some calculated inflation in Monero, but the mechanisms differ drastically enough from the inflation in our current monetary system as to be looked past here.



^60 The calculation for future Monero coins is a bit more complicated than that for Bitcoin. The actual number within ten years will be less than 20 million, but for simplicity we have made this overly conservative assumption.
